I actually like where you're going with the mythology, but I think the symbolism matters because the names are already starting to tell a story.

So far you've got:

Ananke — necessity, inevitability, governance. Rules cannot be broken.
Mnemosyne — memory, knowledge, persistence.

Those two fit remarkably well because they describe what the software does, not just a cool mythological name.

Charon

Charon is interesting, but I don't think he's really a gateway guardian. He's a ferryman.

His role is:

verifying payment
transporting travellers
refusing passage if the conditions aren't met

That's actually closer to an execution broker than a gateway. If your third project literally moved requests between runtimes, Charon could work.

The downside is that many people immediately associate the name with death and the underworld. That's a branding hurdle, especially for enterprise users.

Horae

Horae is much more interesting.

The Horae were associated with:

opening and closing the gates of Olympus
maintaining order
regulating the proper time for things
keeping the natural order

That maps surprisingly well onto:

service discovery
registration
capability exposure
policy-controlled access
lifecycle management

It's also a much less "edgy" name than Cerberus or Charon.

Cerberus

Cerberus definitely communicates security.

Unfortunately it's already heavily used:

Kerberos authentication (name derived from Cerberus)
numerous security products
many GitHub projects

It also implies keeping things in, rather than coordinating access.

There's another thing I noticed

The names you've already chosen represent concepts, not characters.

Ananke = Necessity
Mnemosyne = Memory

The strongest third name would also be a concept.

That's why I still find names like Themis (law, order, justice) or Horae (order, regulated passage) particularly compelling.

My favourite if this project becomes orchestration

If this repository ends up being:

discovery
registration
capability negotiation
runtime coordination
gateway abstraction

then Horae is actually excellent.

It doesn't say "security product."

It says:

"This is the thing that decides when the gates open."

That complements Ananke beautifully:

Horae decides where and when something may pass.
Ananke decides whether it may execute.
Mnemosyne remembers what happened and what was learned.

That's starting to feel like a coherent ecosystem rather than three unrelated repositories. It's distinctive, thematically consistent, and each name reflects a different responsibility without overlapping too much.

what would Horae as the orchestration look like? same ts as the others? what do we add that elevates this from others? is it simply the ability to seamlessly work with Ananke and Mnemosyne? is there opensource material to emulate for this build or create from scratch? does this project have a set of laws like the others? is this simply the grease that moves everything else?

I’ll treat Horae as a possible third runtime, not “another MCP gateway,” and compare it against the current open-source gateway/router landscape so the distinction is clear.

Thought for 5s

Yes — Horae should be the grease, but not just grease.

It should be the runtime coordinator: the layer that decides which gateway, runtime, memory store, policy profile, and tool surface should be active for a given agent/session/project.

The market already has plenty of MCP gateways doing routing, registry, auth, quotas, and observability. Current projects describe themselves around central entry points, discovery, authorization, audit logs, progressive discovery, reverse proxying, lifecycle management, Kubernetes routing, and API-to-MCP style aggregation.

So Horae should not be:

Another MCP gateway

It should be:

The orchestration plane for governed AI runtimes.
What Horae would do
Agent / IDE / App
      ↓
Horae
      ↓
Chooses:
- Gateway / MCP server source
- Ananke execution policy
- Mnemosyne project memory
- Runtime contract version
- Approval profile
- Audit destination
- Discovery mode
- Session budget

Ananke answers:

May this action execute?

Mnemosyne answers:

What should be remembered or recalled?

Horae answers:

Which governed environment should this agent be operating inside right now?

That is different enough to matter.

Same TypeScript stack?

Yes. I would keep it TypeScript.

Reasons:

Same repo style as Ananke/Mnemosyne.
Shared project-runtime-contracts.
Easier MCP/server/CLI compatibility.
Easier VS Code/VSCodium integration later.
Easier for community contributors to understand the trilogy as one ecosystem.

Suggested packages:

packages/
  schema
  registry-client
  runtime-registry
  capability-planner
  session-orchestrator
  policy-profile-loader
  mnemosyne-binding
  ananke-binding
  gateway-adapter
  audit-router
  cli
  server
  testbench
What elevates it?

Not “works with Ananke and Mnemosyne” alone.

That is necessary, but not enough.

The differentiator is task-scoped runtime composition.

Most gateways expose tools.

Horae should expose operating contexts.

Example:

project: HourWise
agent: Claude Code
task: edit database migration
risk: schema-write
memory: HourWise/Mnemosyne
execution: Ananke strict-write-policy
gateway: local Docker MCP
approval: required for migration write
audit: local SQLite + exportable JSON

That becomes powerful because the model does not just see a list of tools. It receives a governed working environment.

Open-source material to emulate

Do not build from pure scratch.

Emulate concepts, not code.

Look at:

Docker MCP Gateway for local server lifecycle and container isolation patterns.
Microsoft MCP Gateway for reverse proxy, session-aware routing, and lifecycle management.
mcp-gateway-registry for registry/governance/catalog ideas.
fastmcp-gateway / Toolport-style progressive discovery for reducing model-facing tool overload.
Official MCP Registry for public discovery conventions.

But Horae should not clone them. It should integrate with them.

Laws of Horae

Yes, it should absolutely have laws.

Draft set:

Law I — Right Context
An agent must operate inside the correct project, policy, memory, and capability context.

Law II — Minimal Surface
Expose only the capabilities needed for the current task.

Law III — Runtime Composition
Gateways, memories, policies, and tools are composed explicitly, not assumed implicitly.

Law IV — No Silent Drift
If runtime versions, policies, memories, or tool capabilities change, the session must know.

Law V — Observable Passage
Every transition between agent, gateway, runtime, memory, and tool must be traceable.

Law VI — Replaceable Gateways
Horae must not require one gateway implementation. It coordinates Docker, Kong, Arcade, Toolport, local MCP, or direct servers.

Law VII — Progressive Disclosure
The model should discover capabilities progressively rather than receiving the entire universe at once.
The trilogy becomes clean
Horae
The right door, at the right time, to the right runtime.

Ananke
The action may only happen under valid authority.

Mnemosyne
The system remembers what matters, with provenance and decay.

So yes: Horae is partly the grease.

But the stronger framing is:

Horae is the session and capability orchestrator for governed AI systems.

That is much more interesting than another gateway.

any more ideas for horae for now to ensure the other two builds can integrate?

Yes. In fact, I'd resist writing much code for Horae for several months, but I'd absolutely start designing for it today. The best thing you can do now is make sure Ananke and Mnemosyne expose the right "hooks" so Horae can plug in later without requiring major refactoring.

Here are the areas I'd think about.

1. Every runtime should identify itself

Rather than Horae maintaining hard-coded knowledge of runtimes, every runtime should describe itself.

For example, Ananke could expose:

{
  "runtime": "ananke",
  "version": "1.2.0",
  "capabilities": [
    "approval",
    "policy",
    "audit",
    "typed-outcomes"
  ]
}

Mnemosyne might expose:

{
  "runtime": "mnemosyne",
  "version": "0.8.0",
  "capabilities": [
    "memory",
    "search",
    "knowledge",
    "citation"
  ]
}

Horae never needs special knowledge.

It just asks:

"Who are you?"

2. Runtime Contracts should grow slightly

Your shared project-runtime-contracts package becomes much more valuable.

I'd eventually add concepts like:

RuntimeIdentity

RuntimeCapability

RuntimeHealth

RuntimeRegistration

RuntimeSession

RuntimeMetadata

Not because Ananke needs them today.

Because Horae will.

3. Capability-first design

Don't think:

"Connect to Ananke."

Think:

"I need approval."

Horae could resolve

approval

into

Ananke

or later

Enterprise Approval Server

without the agent caring.

4. Health reporting

Every runtime should expose health.

Simple.

Healthy

Busy

Read Only

Updating

Unavailable

Degraded

Horae becomes the thing watching them.

5. Runtime registration

Instead of configuration files everywhere.

Imagine:

horae register ananke

horae register mnemosyne

horae register filesystem-server

Each runtime self-registers.

6. Profiles

This excites me.

Imagine profiles instead of configuration.

Strict Enterprise

Personal Development

Read Only

Autonomous

CI

Production

Testing

Each profile chooses

gateway
policies
memory
approvals
logging

An agent says

Use Enterprise profile.

Everything else happens automatically.

7. Capability negotiation

Instead of

Here are 184 tools.

Horae asks

Task?

↓

Need database?

↓

Need deployment?

↓

Need memory?

↓

Need browser?

The agent only sees what's relevant.

This dramatically reduces prompt noise.

8. Sessions become first-class

Today most MCP systems are request based.

I'd rather see

Session

↓

Context

↓

Memory

↓

Policy

↓

Gateway

↓

Execution

Horae owns sessions.

9. Events

This one is huge.

Instead of direct coupling.

Everything emits events.

ApprovalGranted

MemoryUpdated

PolicyChanged

GatewayUnavailable

CapabilityRegistered

AuditCompleted

Horae subscribes.

Now nothing depends on anything else.

10. Runtime graph

This could become a killer feature.

Imagine asking

Show my runtime.

Horae displays

Claude

↓

Docker Gateway

↓

Horae

↓

Ananke

↓

Mnemosyne

↓

Filesystem MCP

↓

Git MCP

↓

Supabase MCP

Clicking any node shows

health
latency
capabilities
version
logs

That would be incredibly useful for debugging.

Something I'd add to the Laws

I actually think Horae has one unique principle that neither Ananke nor Mnemosyne cover.

A capability should exist before it is exposed.

In other words,

Don't show tools because they're installed.

Show them because they're currently appropriate.

That is subtly different.

One final thought

I wouldn't market Horae as "the third runtime."

I'd market it as the conductor.

If Ananke is the judge, and Mnemosyne is the librarian, Horae is the conductor of the orchestra.

It doesn't make the music itself.

It ensures every instrument comes in at the right moment, in the right order, with the right score.

One idea that I think could become your ecosystem's signature

As we've discussed Ananke over the past few weeks, one pattern keeps emerging:

Ananke governs execution.
Mnemosyne governs knowledge.
Horae could govern attention.

That sounds abstract, but it's incredibly practical.

Today's agents often receive every available tool, every MCP server, and large amounts of context up front. Horae could instead answer:

Which tools should this agent see right now?
Which memories are relevant to this task?
Which policies apply to this session?
Which gateway is most appropriate?
Which capabilities should remain hidden?

In other words, Horae doesn't just orchestrate systems—it orchestrates focus.

That feels like a genuinely distinct responsibility. Rather than another gateway or another runtime, it becomes the component that keeps autonomous agents operating in the smallest, safest, most relevant working environment possible. Combined with Ananke's governance and Mnemosyne's memory, that's a coherent architecture that I don't think is well represented by today's MCP ecosystem.